=== PAGE 1 ===
Style Guide
Twelfth edition

=== PAGE 2 ===
Published under exclusive licence from The Economist by 
Profile Books Ltd 
3 Holford Yard
Bevin Way
London wc1x 9hd
www.profilebooks.com
Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Ltd, 1986, 1991, 1993, 1996, 1998, 
2000, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2010, 2013, 2015, 2018
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved 
above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or 
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the 
publisher of this book.
The greatest care has been taken in compiling this book. However, no 
responsibility can be accepted by the publishers or compilers for the 
accuracy of the information presented. 
Typeset in Milo by MacGuru Ltd  
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays, St Ives plc
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
isbn 978 1 78125 831 6
eisbn 978 1 78283 348 2
   

=== PAGE 3 ===
Preface
vii
Introduction
1
part 1	 The essence of style
5
part 2	 American and British English
155
part 3	 Useful reference
175
	
Index
261
Contents

=== PAGE 4 ===
vii
Preface
Every newspaper has its own style book, a set of rules telling 
journalists whether to write e-mail or email, Gadaffi or Qaddafi, 
judgement or judgment. The Economist’s internal style book (now 
an online guide, rather than a book) does this and a bit more. It also 
warns writers of some common mistakes and encourages them to 
write with clarity and simplicity.
All the prescriptive judgments in the style guide are directly 
derived from those used each week in writing and editing The 
Economist. And some of the judgments, advice and definitions given 
here differ from those given by other authorities.
This twelfth edition of the “The Economist Style Guide” is in three 
parts. The first is based on the traditional style book used by those 
who edit The Economist; it is largely the work of John Grimond, who 
over the years was editor of the Britain, United States and Foreign 
sections, before retiring in 2013. Johnny is a hard act to follow, and he 
left at a time when proper English usage seemed in full retreat in the 
face of texting, tweeting and internet jargon generally. His work still 
stands as a bulwark against it, as well as a monument to his impish 
wit and his sense of euphony, rightness and correctness. If slight 
cracks have now appeared in the bulwark, it is because language is a 
living thing that continually changes; some changes are benign, and 
some (such as the pervasive “smartness” of the digital age) simply 
cannot be resisted.
The second part of the book, on American and British English, 
describes some of the main differences between the two great 
English-speaking areas in spelling, grammar and usage.
To make the style guide of greater general interest, Part 3 consists 
of handy reference material that might appeal to readers of The 
Economist.

=== PAGE 5 ===
viii
Style Guide
Throughout the text, italic type is used for examples except where 
they are presented in lists, when the type is roman, as this text is. 
Words in bold indicate a separate but relevant entry, that is, a cross-
reference. 
Many people have been involved in this book as it has developed and 
changed over the years. Thanks are due to all of them, with special 
thanks to Penny Butler, Ingrid Esling, Graham Douglas, Penny Garrett, 
Lane Greene and Anton LaGuardia, whose help has been invaluable 
and continues to be so.
Ann Wroe,
Obituaries Editor, The Economist
January 2018

=== PAGE 6 ===
1
Introduction
On only two scores can The Economist hope to outdo its rivals 
consistently. One is the quality of its analysis; the other is the quality 
of its writing. The aim of this book is to give some general advice on 
writing, to point out some common errors and to set some arbitrary 
rules.
The first requirement of The Economist is that it should be readily 
understandable. Clarity of writing usually follows clarity of thought. 
So think what you want to say, then say it as simply as possible. Keep 
in mind George Orwell’s six elementary rules:
1 	 Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you 
are used to seeing in print (see metaphors).
2 	 Never use a long word where a short one will do (see short words).
3 	 If it is possible to cut out a word, always cut it out (see unnecessary 
words).
4 	 Never use the passive where you can use the active (see grammar 
and syntax).
5 	 Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if 
you can think of an everyday English equivalent.
6 	 Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright 
barbarous.
Readers are primarily interested in what you have to say. By the 
way in which you say it, you may encourage them either to read on or 
to give up. If you want them to read on:
Catch the attention of the reader  and then get straight into the 
article. Do not spend several sentences clearing your throat, 
setting the scene or sketching in the background. Introduce the 
facts as you tell the story and hold the reader by the way you 
unfold the tale and by a fresh but unpretentious use of language.

=== PAGE 7 ===
2
Style Guide
In starting your article, let your model be the essays of Francis 
Bacon. He starts “Of Riches” with “I cannot call riches better than 
the baggage of virtue.” “Of Cunning” opens with “We take cunning 
for a sinister or crooked wisdom.” “Of Suspicion” is instantly on 
the wing with “Suspicions amongst thoughts are like bats amongst 
birds, they ever fly by twilight.” Each of these beginnings carries 
implicitly within it an entire essay. Each seizes the reader by the 
lapels and at once draws him into the subject. No gimmickry is 
needed, no flowery language, no literary contrivance. Plain words 
on their own carry enough meaning to provoke an intriguing 
thought, stir the reader’s curiosity and thus make him want to 
continue.
You must strive for a similar effect. Articles in The Economist 
should be like essays, in that they have a beginning, a middle and 
an end. They should not be mere bits of information stitched 
together. Each should be a coherent whole, a series of paragraphs 
that follow logically in order and, ideally, will suffer if even one 
sentence is cut out. If the article is a report, the facts must be 
selected and presented as a story. If it is a leader or more analytical 
article, it should also have a sense of sequence, so that the reader 
feels he is progressing from a beginning to a conclusion.
Either way, it is up to you to provide the ideas, analysis and 
argument that bind the elements of the article together. That is 
the hard part. Once you have them, though, you need only plain, 
straightforward words to express them. Do not imagine that 
you can disguise the absence of thought with long words, stale 
metaphors or the empty jargon of academics. In moderation, 
however, you can enliven your writing with a fresh metaphor, an 
occasional exuberance or an unusual word or phrase that nicely 
suits your purpose.
Read through your writing several times.  Edit it ruthlessly, 
whether by cutting or polishing or sharpening, on each occasion. 
Avoid repetition. Cut out anything superfluous. And resist any 
temptation to achieve a literary effect by making elliptical remarks 
or allusions to unexplained people or events. Rather, hold your 
reader’s attention by keeping the story moving. If the tale begins to 
flag, or the arguments seem less than convincing, you can rescue 

=== PAGE 8 ===
3
introduction
it only by the sharpness of your mind. Nothing is to be gained by 
resorting to orotundities and grandiloquence, still less by calling 
on clichés and vogue expressions. Unadorned, unfancy prose is 
usually all you need.
Do not be stuffy.  “To write a genuine, familiar or truly English 
style”, said Hazlitt, “is to write as anyone would speak in common 
conversation who had a thorough command or choice of words or 
who could discourse with ease, force and perspicuity setting aside 
all pedantic and oratorical flourishes.”
Use the language of everyday speech, not that of spokesmen, 
lawyers or bureaucrats (so prefer let to permit, people to persons, 
buy to purchase, colleague to peer, way out to exit, present to gift, rich 
to wealthy, show to demonstrate, break to violate). Pomposity and 
long-windedness tend to obscure meaning, or reveal the lack of it: 
strip them away in favour of plain words.
Do not be hectoring or arrogant.  Those who disagree with you are 
not necessarily stupid or insane. Nobody needs to be described 
as silly: let your analysis show that he is. When you express 
opinions, do not simply make assertions. The aim is not just 
to tell readers what you think, but to persuade them; if you use 
arguments, reasoning and evidence, you may succeed. Go easy on 
the oughts and shoulds.
Do not be too pleased with yourself.  Don’t boast of your own 
cleverness by telling readers that you correctly predicted 
something or that you have a scoop. You are more likely to bore or 
irritate them than to impress them.
Do not be too chatty.  Surprise, surprise is more irritating than 
informative. So is Ho, ho and, in the middle of a sentence, wait for 
it, etc.
Do not be too didactic.  If too many sentences begin Compare, 
Consider, Expect, Imagine, Look at, Note, Prepare for, Remember or 
Take, readers will think they are reading a textbook (or, indeed, a 
style book). This may not be the way to persuade them to renew 
their subscriptions.

=== PAGE 9 ===
4
Style Guide
Do your best to be lucid.  (“I see but one rule: to be clear”, Stendhal.) 
Simple sentences help. Keep complicated constructions and 
gimmicks to a minimum, if necessary by remembering the New 
Yorker’s comment: “Backward ran sentences until reeled the 
mind.”
Mark Twain described how a good writer treats sentences: “At 
times he may indulge himself with a long one, but he will make 
sure there are no folds in it, no vaguenesses, no parenthetical 
interruptions of its view as a whole; when he has done with it, it 
won’t be a sea-serpent with half of its arches under the water; it 
will be a torch-light procession.”
Long paragraphs, like long sentences, can confuse the reader. 
“The paragraph”, according to Fowler, “is essentially a unit of 
thought, not of length; it must be homogeneous in subject matter 
and sequential in treatment.” One-sentence paragraphs should be 
used only occasionally.
Clear thinking is the key to clear writing. “A scrupulous writer”, 
observed Orwell, “in every sentence that he writes will ask himself 
at least four questions, thus: What am I trying to say? What words 
will express it? What image or idiom will make it clearer? Is 
this image fresh enough to have an effect? And he will probably 
ask himself two more: Could I put it more shortly? Have I said 
anything that is avoidably ugly?”
Scrupulous writers will also notice that their copy is edited 
only lightly and is likely to be used. It may even be read.

=== PAGE 10 ===
part 1
The essence of style

=== PAGE 11 ===
6
a
a or the  see grammar and syntax.
abbreviations 
Write words in their full form on first appearance:
Trades Union Congress (not tuc), Troubled Asset Relief Programme 
(not tarp)
unless an abbreviation or acronym is so familiar that it is used 
more often in full:
aids  bbc  cia  eu  fbi  hiv  imf  nasa nato  ngo  oecd  
unesco
or unless the full form would provide little illumination – 
awacs, dna. If in doubt about its familiarity, explain what the 
organisation is or does. After the first mention, try not to repeat 
the abbreviation too often; so write the agency rather than the 
iaea, the party rather than the kmt, to avoid spattering the page 
with capital letters. And prefer chief executive, boss or manager to 
ceo.
There is no need to give the initials of an organisation if it is 
not referred to again. This clutters both the page and the brain.
Do not use spatterings of abbreviations and acronyms simply 
in order to cram more words in; you will end up irritating readers 
rather than informing them. An article in a recent issue of The 
Economist contained the following:
cia  dci  dni  dod  dvd  fbi  nctc  nsa
Some of these are well known to most readers and can readily be 
held in the mind. But unfamiliar abbreviations may oblige the 
reader to constantly refer back to the first use.

=== PAGE 12 ===
7
a or the  >  abbreviations
ampersands  should be used:
1	
when they are part of the name of a company:
	
Procter & Gamble  Pratt & Whitney
2	
for such things as constituencies, where two names are linked 
to form one unit:
	
The rest of Brighouse & Spenborough joins with the Batley part of 
Batley & Morley to form Batley & Spen.
	
The area thus became the Pakistani province of Kashmir and the 
Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir.
3	
in r&d and s&1.
compass references/readings  should be given as 40°N, etc.
definite article  If an abbreviation can be pronounced – cosatu, 
nato, unesco – it does not generally require the definite 
article. Other organisations, except companies, should usually be 
preceded by the:
the bbc  the kgb  the nhs  the niesr  the unhcr
elements
Do not sprinkle chemical symbols unnecessarily: they may 
put readers off. But common abbreviations such as CO2 may 
sometimes be used for variety.
Different isotopes of the same element are distinguished by raised 
(superscript) prefixes:
carbon-14 is 14C
helium-3 is 3He
initials in people’s and companies’ names  take points (with a 
space between initials and name, but not between initials). In 
general, follow the practice preferred by people, companies and 
organisations in writing their own names, for example:
I.M. Pei  J.C. Penney  J. Sainsbury  A.N. Wilson
junior and senior  Spell out in full (and lower case) junior and 
senior after a name:
Douglas Fairbanks junior  Douglas Fairbanks senior

=== PAGE 13 ===
part 1: the essence of style
8
lower case  Abbreviate:
kilograms (not kilogrammes) to kg (or kilos)
kilometres per hour to kph
kilometres to km
miles per hour to mph
Use m for million, bn for billion and trn for trillion.
Use lower case for kg, km, lb (never lbs), mph and other measures, 
and for ie, eg; ie should be followed by a comma. When used 
with figures, these lower-case abbreviations should follow 
immediately, with no space:
11am  4.30pm  15kg  35mm  100mph  78rpm
Two abbreviations together, however, must be separated: 60m b/d. 
Use b/d not bpd as an abbreviation for barrels per day.
mps  Except in British contexts, use mp only after first spelling out 
member of Parliament in full (in many places an mp is a military 
policeman).
Members of the European Parliament are meps (not Euro-mps).
Members of the Scottish Parliament are msps.
Members of the Welsh Assembly are ams (Assembly Members).
organisations
efta is the European Free Trade Association.
The fao is the Food and Agriculture Organisation.
The fda is the Food and Drug Administration.
The ida is the International Development Association.
nafta is the North American Free-Trade Agreement.
The plo is the Palestine Liberation Organisation.
pronounceable abbreviations
Abbreviations that can be pronounced and are composed of bits 
of words rather than just initials should be spelt out in upper and 
lower case:
Cocom 	
Nepad	
Unicef
Mercosur	
Renamo	
Unprofor
There is generally no need for more than one initial capital letter, 
unless the word is a name: ConsGold, KwaZulu, McKay, MiG.

=== PAGE 14 ===
abbreviations
9
OK (supposedly an abbreviation for “Oll Correct”) is spelled thus, 
and is not okay when spelled thus.
ranks and titles  Do not use Prof, Sen, Col, etc. Lieut-Colonel and 
Lieut-Commander are permissible. (These should be Commander 
and Colonel on second mention.) Rev is also permissible, but it 
must be preceded by the and followed by a Christian name or 
initial: the Rev Jesse Jackson (thereafter Mr Jackson).
scientific units named after individuals  Scientific units, except 
those of temperature, that are named after individuals are not 
capitalised when written out in full: watt, joule, etc. When 
abbreviated these units should be set in capitals, though any 
attachments denoting multiples go in lower case:
watt is w
kilowatt, 1,000 watts, is kw
milliwatt, one-thousandth of a watt, is mw
megawatt, 1m watts, is mw
gigawatt, 1 bn (109) watts, is gw 
terawatt, 1 trn (1012) watts, is tw 
petawatt, 1 quadrillion (1015) watts, is pw 
megahertz is mhz
writing out upper-case abbreviations  Most upper-case 
abbreviations are shortenings of proper names with initial capital 
letters. The lso is the London Symphony Orchestra. However, there 
are exceptions:
cap but common agricultural policy
emu but economic and monetary union
gdp but gross domestic product
psbr but public-sector borrowing requirement
vlsi but very large-scale integration
miscellaneous  Spell out:
page  pages  hectares  miles
Do not spell out Centigrade, and do not use Fahrenheit for 
temperature.
Remember, too, that the v of hiv stands for virus, so do not write 

=== PAGE 15 ===
part 1: the essence of style
10
hiv virus. Similarly the D of DAB stands for digital, so do not write 
DAB digital radio.
See measures in Part 3.
absent  In Latin absent is a verb meaning they are away. In English it 
is either an adjective (absent friends) or a verb (to absent yourself). 
Avoid the American habit of using it as a preposition meaning in 
the absence of.
accents  On words now accepted as English, use accents only when 
they make a crucial difference to pronunciation:
café  cliché  communiqué  éclat  exposé  façade  soupçon
But: chateau  decor  elite  feted  naive
The main accents and diacritical signs are:
acute	
république
grave	
grand-mère
circumflex	
bête noire
umlaut	
Länder, Österreich (Austria)
cedilla	
français
tilde	
señor, São Paulo
If you use one accent (except the tilde – strictly, a diacritical sign), 
use all:
émigré  mêlée  protégé  résumé
Put the accents and diacritical signs on French, German, Spanish 
and Portuguese names and words only:
José Manuel Barroso	
cafèzinho
Federico Peña	
coñac
Françoise de Panafieu	
déjeuner
Wolfgang Schäuble	
Frühstück
Any foreign word in italics should, however, be given its proper 
accents. See also italics.
acronym  A pronounceable word, formed from the initials of other 
words, like radar, nimby or nato. It is not a set of initials, like the 
bbc or the imf.
actionable  means giving ground for a lawsuit. Do not use it to mean 

=== PAGE 16 ===
11
absent  >  agony column
susceptible of being put into practice: prefer practical or practicable. 
Do not use action as a verb.
adjectives and adverbs  see grammar and syntax, punctuation.
adjectives of proper nouns  see grammar and syntax, punctuation.
address  What did journalists and politicians do in the days, not so 
long ago, when address was used as a verb only before objects 
such as audience, letter, ball, haggis and, occasionally, themselves? 
Questions can be answered, issues discussed, problems solved, 
difficulties dealt with. See clichés.
aetiology, etiolate  Aetiology is the science of causation, or an inquiry into 
something’s origins. Etiolate is to make or become pale for lack of light.
affect (verb)  means to have an influence on, as in the novel affected 
his attitude to immigrants. See also effect.
affirmative action  is a euphemism with little to be said for it. It is 
too late to suppress it altogether, but try to avoid it as much as 
possible. If you cannot escape it, put it in quotation marks on first 
mention and, unless the context makes its meaning clear, explain 
what it is. You may, however, find that preferential treatment, job 
preferment or even discrimination serve just as well as alternatives. 
See euphemisms.
affordable  By whom? Avoid affordable housing, affordable computers 
and other unthinking uses of advertising lingo.
Afghan names  see names.
aggravate  means make worse, not irritate or annoy.
aggression  is an unattractive quality, so do not call a keen salesman 
an aggressive one (unless his foot is in the door).
agony column  Remember that when Sherlock Holmes perused this, 
it was a personal column. Only recently has it come to mean letters 
to an agony aunt.

=== PAGE 17 ===
part 1: the essence of style
12
agree  Things are agreed on, to or about, not just agreed. See transitive 
and intransitive verbs.
aircraft  see hyphens and italics.
alibi  An alibi is the fact of being elsewhere, not a false explanation.
alternate, alternative  Alternate (as an adjective) means every other. 
As a noun, it has now come to mean a stand-in for a director or 
delegate. Alternative (as a noun), strictly, means one of two, not 
one of three, four, five or more (which may be options). As an 
adjective, alternative means of two (or, loosely, more) things, or 
possible as an alternative.
Americanisms 
See Part 2, on British and American usage. To the points made 
there might be added the following preferred usages in British 
English (and in The Economist):
and not additionally
the army not the military (noun)
car not automobile
company not corporation
court not courtroom or courthouse
district not neighborhood
normality not normalcy
oblige not obligate
rocket not skyrocket
Back-formations are common in English, so curate, the verb 
meaning organise or superintend exhibitions of pictures, 
sculptures and so on formed from curator, is now acceptable in 
British English. But it is still too soon for gallerist (prefer dealer or, 
if appropriate, just gallery).
adverbs  Put adverbs where you would put them in normal 
English speech, which is usually after the verb (not before it, 
which usually is where Americans put them).
avoid nouning adjectives  Do not noun adjectives such as:
advisory – prefer warning

=== PAGE 18 ===
13
agree  >  Americanisms
centennial – prefer centenary
inaugural – prefer inauguration
avoid verbing and adjectiving nouns  Try not to verb nouns or to 
adjective them. So do not:
access files (except electronically)
action proposals
author books (still less co-author them)
critique style guides
gun someone down; use shoot
haemorrhage red ink (haemorrhage is a noun)
let one event impact another (try affect)
loan money, still less gift it
pressure colleagues (press will do)
progress reports, or reference them
source inputs
summit a hill
trial programmes
See transitive and intransitive verbs.
Avoid parenting (or using the word) and parenting skills. (See also 
grammar and syntax.)
Though it is sometimes necessary to use nouns as adjectives, do 
not call:
an attempted coup a coup attempt
a suspected terrorist a terrorist suspect
the Californian legislature the California legislature
And avoid throwing together several nouns into one adjectival 
reticule:
Texas millionaire real-estate developer and failed thrift entrepreneur 
Hiram Turnipseed …
coining words  Avoid coining verbs and adjectives unnecessarily.
Instead of:
dining experiences and writing experiences, use dining and writing;
downplaying criticism, you can play it down (or perhaps minimise it);
upcoming and ongoing use forthcoming and continuing.
Why outfit your children when you can fit them out?

=== PAGE 19 ===
part 1: the essence of style
14
Hosting has now entered the language (often to mean acting as host 
at an event paid for by someone else, otherwise giving would be the 
right word), but guesting (appearing as a guest on a programme) 
should be kept at bay, as should gifting.
overuse of American words  Do not feel obliged to follow 
American usage with such words as:
constituency – try supporters
gubernatorial – try governor’s
perception – try belief or view
rhetoric (of which there is too little, not too much) – try language 
or speeches or exaggeration if that is what you mean
Note that in British usage:
City centres are not central cities.
Companies: call for a record profit if you wish to exhort the 
workers, but not if you merely predict one. And do not post it if it 
has been achieved. If it has not, look for someone new to head, not 
head up, the company.
Countries, nations and states: London is the country’s capital, not 
the nation’s. If you wish to build a nation, you will bind its peoples 
together; if you wish to build a state, you will forge its institutions.
Deep: make a deep study or even a study in depth, but not an in-
depth study.
Grow a beard or a tomato, but not a company (or indeed a 
salesman: the Financial Times reported on August 8th 2003 that 
bmw was “to grow its own car salesmen”).
Do not use likely to mean probably.
On-site inspections are allowed, but not on-train teams or in-ear 
headphones.
Stay outside the door, not outside of it.
Programme: you may program a computer, but in all other contexts 
the word is programme.
Use power cut or blackout rather than outage.
Keep a promise, rather than deliver on it.
Raise cattle and pigs, but children are (or should be) brought up.
Regular is not a synonym for ordinary or normal: Mussolini 
brought in the regular train, All-Bran the regular man; it is quite 
normal to be without either.

=== PAGE 20 ===
15
Americanisms  >  an
A religious group sounds better than a faith-based organisation.
Do not task people, or meet with them.
Throw stones, not rocks.
Trains run from railway stations, not train stations. The people in 
them, and on buses, are passengers, not riders.
Use senior rather than ranking.
And only the speechless are dumb and the insane mad.
tenses  Choose tenses according to British usage, too. In 
particular, do not fight shy of the perfect tense, especially where 
no date or time is given. Thus:
Mr Obama has woken up to the danger is preferable to Mr Obama 
woke up to the danger, unless you can add last week or when he 
heard the explosion.
Do not write Your salary just got smaller or I shrunk the kids. In 
British English Your salary has just got smaller and I’ve shrunk the 
kids.
See also adjectives of proper nouns, euphemisms, grammar and 
syntax, and Part 2.
among and between  Some sticklers insist that, where division 
is involved, among should be used where three or more are 
concerned, between where only two are concerned. So:
The plum jobs were shared among the Socialists, the Liberals and 
the Christian Democrats, while the president and the vice-president 
divided the cash between themselves.
This distinction is unnecessary. But take care with between. To fall 
between two stools, however painful, is grammatically acceptable; 
to fall between the cracks is to challenge the laws of physics.
Prefer among to amongst, as while to whilst.
an  should be used before a word beginning with a vowel sound (an 
egg, an umbrella, an mp) or an h if, and only if, the h is silent (an 
honorary degree). But a European, a university, a U-turn, a hospital, a 
hotel. Historical and historian are preceded by a whether or not you 
treat the h as silent.

